docs/Example.md, before:

# Practical Implementation Example
{:.no_toc}

- This will be replaced with a table of contents

{:toc}

There are many Domain Name Service (DNS) server options, but for the purposes of this guide we will use BIND on Linux, a very popular open source solution.

What services does the Networked Media Open Specifications (NMOS) Registration and Discovery Service (RDS) server need to provide? From the [AMWA NMOS IS-04 specification](https://specs.amwa.tv/is-04/releases/v1.3.1/docs/3.0._Discovery.html), the following services should be configured:

- `_nmos-register._tcp`: A logical host which advertises a Registration API.
- `_nmos-query._tcp`: A logical host which advertises a Query API.

The following service does need not to be configured:

- `_nmos-node._tcp`: A logical host which advertises a Node API.

## DNS Build / Configuration

This guide has been tested on CentOS 7, Ubuntu 16.04, and Raspbian (Buster).  These instructions should work for Debian and may other versions of Linux as well.

We assume that the Linux installation has been completed, the server has a static IP address, and that it has access to the Internet.  (The Internet connection may be disconnected once the BIND installation is complete.)


### Installing BIND

BIND9 can be installed from the linux command line (as root), with the following:

CentOS 7
```
sudo yum install bind bind-utils
```

Ubuntu
```
apt update && apt install bind9 bind-utils
```

Raspbian
```
apt update && apt install bind9
```

### Adding the example zone to the DNS server

In this example, we will be working with the domain `gplab.com`.  We must add this domain to the configuration file of the DNS server so that it knows it is responsible for responding to queries for this domain (referred to as a 'zone' in BIND).  Zone information is kept in the following directories, depending upon your Linux version:

CentOS 7 `/etc/bind/named.conf`
Ubuntu/Raspbian `/etc/bind/named.conf.local`

To add the zone, enter the information below in the appropriate configuration file for your distribution.

```
zone "gplab.com" {
        type master;
        file "/etc/bind/zones/db.gplab.com";
};
```

### Configuring the Zone file

You will notice the line `file "/etc/bind/zones/db.gplab.com";` in the configuration above.  This is a pointer to the zone file for the domain `gplab.com`.  In order for the DNS server to work properly, you will need to create this zone file.  But first create the directory `/etc/bind/zones/`.

```
gp@gplab.com:~ # cd /etc/bind
gp@gplab.com:~ # mkdir zones
gp@gplab.com:~ # cd zones
```

Next, use any text editor to create the file `db.gplab.com` in the `/etc/bind/zones` directory based upon the directions below.

### Configuring the hosts / TXT / SRV file

We begin by defining several required DNS parameters.

```
$TTL 3600
@       IN      SOA     dns1.gplab.com. admin.gplab.com. (
           20210713     ; Serial
               3600     ; Refresh
                600     ; Retry
            2419200     ; Expire
             604800 )   ; Negative Cache TTL
```

Then we define our DNS server for this zone. End-points should be configured with this DNS server.

```
; DNS server
        IN      NS      dns.gplab.com.
```

We add the following PTR records to indicate the server supports Service Discovery.  Clients looking for DNS-SD support will query the server for these specific records (`b` is for `browse`,  `lb` is for `legacy browse`.)

```
; These lines indicate to clients that this server supports DNS Service Discovery
b._dns-sd._udp	IN	PTR	@
lb._dns-sd._udp	IN	PTR	@
```

Next we define the NMOS services provided by this server:

```
; These lines indicate to clients which NMOS service types this server advertises:
_services._dns-sd._udp	PTR	_nmos-register._tcp
_services._dns-sd._udp	PTR	_nmos-query._tcp
```

There should be one `PTR` record for each instance of the service you wish to advertise. Here we have one service available through the Registration API and one service available through the Query API:

```
_nmos-register._tcp	PTR	reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp
_nmos-query._tcp	PTR	qry-api-1._nmos-query._tcp
```

Now we add SRV records that return the URL for the registration and query servers.  In this case, both of the records point to `rds1.gplab.com`.

```
; NMOS RDS services
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      10      80      rds1.gplab.com.
qry-api-1._nmos-query._tcp.gplab.com.        3600    IN SRV  10      10      80      rds1.gplab.com.
```

We add TXT records which provide information relevant to the IS-04 specification

```
; Additional metadata relevant to the IS-04 specification.
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.	TXT	"api_ver=v1.0,v1.1,v1.2,v1.3" "api_proto=http" "pri=0" "api_auth=false"
qry-api-1._nmos-query._tcp.gplab.com.           TXT     "api_ver=v1.0,v1.1,v1.2,v1.3" "api_proto=http" "pri=0" "api_auth=false"
```

We add records which associate the NMOS register and NMOS query with the RDS.
```
; RDS
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      20      80      rds1.gplab.com.
_nmos-query._tcp.gplab.com.        3600    IN SRV  10      20      80      rds1.gplab.com.
```

In both cases above the `SRV` records tell clients to access the server using port `80`. This would suit default HTTP access, but if HTTPS is used, this would need to be changed to `443`.

Lastly we provide the IP addresses for the hosts in the system. This file can of course be expanded to contain names for all the hosts, end-points, and switches in the system, making debugging simpler.


```
; Nameserver records
dns1.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.18
rds1.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.50
```



### Starting the service

Once the files are in place, the service can be started and made permanent (will run after a reload/reboot of the server):

CentOS 7
```
systemctl restart named
systemctl enable named
```

Ubuntu/Raspbian
```
systemctl restart bind9
systemctl enable bind9
```

### Enabling DNS through the linux firewall

Often, linux default will prevent DNS through the firewall, so you have issues with connectivity to the DNS server now running. The following will enable DNS through the CentOS 7 firewall, and make this permanent:


```
firewall-cmd --permanent --add-port=53/udp
firewall-cmd --reload
```

## Testing

You can test the functionality of the new DNS server right from the server itself.  You can also run these tests from a Linux box or Mac by setting the `nameserver` portion of the Linux or Mac box network configuration to point to your new DNS server.  If you run the tests below from a separate computer, omit `localhost` or `@locahost` from the commands below.

There are a couple of tools that allow the DNS operation to be tested.

We can verify that the host names of the RDS servers are configured:


```
gp@gplab.com:~ # nslookup rds1.gplab.com locahost
Server:		192.168.0.18
Address:	192.168.0.18#53

Name:	rds1.gplab.com
Address: 192.168.0.50
```


We can see that the lookup was resolved by `192.168.0.18`, and resulted in the address for the `rds1` server being returned as `192.168.0.50`.

The `dig` tool provides a little more info:

```
gp@gplab.com:~ # dig @localhost rds1.gplab.com

; <<>> DiG 9.10.6 <<>> rds1.gplab.com
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 12178
;; flags: qr aa rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 2, ADDITIONAL: 3

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;rds1.gplab.com.		IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
rds1.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.50

;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
gplab.com.		3600	IN	NS	dns2.gplab.com.
gplab.com.		3600	IN	NS	dns1.gplab.com.

;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
dns1.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.18
dns2.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.20

;; Query time: 43 msec
;; SERVER: 192.168.0.18#53(192.168.0.18)
;; WHEN: Tue Jul 13 19:58:50 IST 2021
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 134
```

### Checking the SRV records

We can also use `dig` to check the presence of the `_nmos._register_.tcp` record:


```
gp@gplab.com:~ # dig @localhost _nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com SRV

; <<>> DiG 9.10.6 <<>> _nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com SRV
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 44496
;; flags: qr aa rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 2, AUTHORITY: 2, ADDITIONAL: 5

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com. IN	SRV

;; ANSWER SECTION:
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com. 3600 IN SRV	10 10 80 rds1.gplab.com.
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com. 3600 IN SRV	20 10 80 rds2.gplab.com.

;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
gplab.com.		3600	IN	NS	dns2.gplab.com.
gplab.com.		3600	IN	NS	dns1.gplab.com.

;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
rds1.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.50
rds2.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.51
dns1.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.18
dns2.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.20

;; Query time: 41 msec
;; SERVER: 192.168.0.18#53(192.168.0.18)
;; WHEN: Tue Jul 13 20:00:53 IST 2021
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 243
```

## Backing Up DNS (BIND) Servers

To provide resilience, a secondary DNS server and a secondary RDS server should be provisioned. end-points should have both DNS IP addresses configured, allowing them to use the backup DNS server, if the primary is no longer available.

BIND allows primary / secondary pairing, so that the zones and hosts configuration can be automatically updated on the secondary device, reducing the amount of duplication.

There should be one `PTR` record for each instance of the service you wish to advertise. Here we have one Registration API and one Query API:

```
_nmos-register._tcp	PTR	reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp
_nmos-query._tcp		PTR	qry-api-1._nmos-query._tcp
```

If more than one RDS server can be used, then two records can be provided, with a priority setting to enable end-points to make a preferred decision. In this case, the first is prioritized, with the `10` beating `20`.

```
; NMOS RDS services
; Expected RDS
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      10      80      rds1.gplab.com.

; Backup RDS
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  20      10      80      rds2.gplab.com.
```

A TXT record providing information relevant to the IS-04 specification

```
; Additional metadata relevant to the IS-04 specification.
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.	TXT	"api_ver=v1.0,v1.1,v1.2,v1.3" "api_proto=http" "pri=0" "api_auth=false"
```


Take advice from the RDS vendor about how to set the Priority (`10`) and Weight (`20`) for these `SRV` records. If active-active is available in the RDS servers, then these records can be used to provide load-balancing. In the case below, both records would be served with equal weight.


```
; RDS A
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      20      80      rds1.gplab.com.

; RDS B
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      20      80      rds2.gplab.com.
```


In all cases above the `SRV` records are identifying a port number of `80`. This would suit default HTTP access, with `443` needed for HTTPS - but again, this would be a question for the RDS vendor.

Lastly we provide the IP addresses for the hosts in the system. This file can of course be expanded to contain names for all the hosts, end-points, and switches in the system, making debugging simpler 


```
; Nameserver records
dns1.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.18
dns2.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.20
rds1.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.50
rds2.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.51
```

Commit message:

adds short intro
Adds an introduction explaining that this is a how-to guide and not a tutorial.

docs/Example.md, after:

# Practical Implementation Example
This is a practical example of how to implement DNS-SD on a Linux system using the BIND9 DNS server.  It is meant to provide a relatively simple, easy-to-follow "recipe" for getting DNS-SD up and running in a short period of time.  It is not intended to be a tutorial article, and therefore, it excludes explanation regarding DNS parameters, or why they are being used.  A search of the Internet will turn up many excellent tutorials for DNS and DNS-SD, and of course, a number of excellent books have been written on the subject of DNS and specifically BIND9.  We hope you find this how-to guide to be useful.
{:.no_toc}

- This will be replaced with a table of contents

{:toc}

There are many Domain Name Service (DNS) server options, but for the purposes of this guide we will use BIND on Linux, a very popular open source solution.

What services does the Networked Media Open Specifications (NMOS) Registration and Discovery Service (RDS) server need to provide? From the [AMWA NMOS IS-04 specification](https://specs.amwa.tv/is-04/releases/v1.3.1/docs/3.0._Discovery.html), the following services should be configured:

- `_nmos-register._tcp`: A logical host which advertises a Registration API.
- `_nmos-query._tcp`: A logical host which advertises a Query API.

The following service does need not to be configured:

- `_nmos-node._tcp`: A logical host which advertises a Node API.

## DNS Build / Configuration

This guide has been tested on CentOS 7, Ubuntu 16.04, and Raspbian (Buster).  These instructions should work for Debian and may other versions of Linux as well.

We assume that the Linux installation has been completed, the server has a static IP address, and that it has access to the Internet.  (The Internet connection may be disconnected once the BIND installation is complete.)


### Installing BIND

BIND9 can be installed from the linux command line (as root), with the following:

CentOS 7
```
sudo yum install bind bind-utils
```

Ubuntu
```
apt update && apt install bind9 bind-utils
```

Raspbian
```
apt update && apt install bind9
```

### Adding the example zone to the DNS server

In this example, we will be working with the domain `gplab.com`.  We must add this domain to the configuration file of the DNS server so that it knows it is responsible for responding to queries for this domain (referred to as a 'zone' in BIND).  Zone information is kept in the following directories, depending upon your Linux version:

CentOS 7 `/etc/bind/named.conf`
Ubuntu/Raspbian `/etc/bind/named.conf.local`

To add the zone, enter the information below in the appropriate configuration file for your distribution.

```
zone "gplab.com" {
        type master;
        file "/etc/bind/zones/db.gplab.com";
};
```

### Configuring the Zone file

You will notice the line `file "/etc/bind/zones/db.gplab.com";` in the configuration above.  This is a pointer to the zone file for the domain `gplab.com`.  In order for the DNS server to work properly, you will need to create this zone file.  But first create the directory `/etc/bind/zones/`.

```
gp@gplab.com:~ # cd /etc/bind
gp@gplab.com:~ # mkdir zones
gp@gplab.com:~ # cd zones
```

Next, use any text editor to create the file `db.gplab.com` in the `/etc/bind/zones` directory based upon the directions below.

### Configuring the hosts / TXT / SRV file

We begin by defining several required DNS parameters.

```
$TTL 3600
@       IN      SOA     dns1.gplab.com. admin.gplab.com. (
           20210713     ; Serial
               3600     ; Refresh
                600     ; Retry
            2419200     ; Expire
             604800 )   ; Negative Cache TTL
```

Then we define our DNS server for this zone. End-points should be configured with this DNS server.

```
; DNS server
        IN      NS      dns.gplab.com.
```

We add the following PTR records to indicate the server supports Service Discovery.  Clients looking for DNS-SD support will query the server for these specific records (`b` is for `browse`,  `lb` is for `legacy browse`.)

```
; These lines indicate to clients that this server supports DNS Service Discovery
b._dns-sd._udp	IN	PTR	@
lb._dns-sd._udp	IN	PTR	@
```

Next we define the NMOS services provided by this server:

```
; These lines indicate to clients which NMOS service types this server advertises:
_services._dns-sd._udp	PTR	_nmos-register._tcp
_services._dns-sd._udp	PTR	_nmos-query._tcp
```

There should be one `PTR` record for each instance of the service you wish to advertise. Here we have one service available through the Registration API and one service available through the Query API:

```
_nmos-register._tcp	PTR	reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp
_nmos-query._tcp	PTR	qry-api-1._nmos-query._tcp
```

Now we add SRV records that return the URL for the registration and query servers.  In this case, both of the records point to `rds1.gplab.com`.

```
; NMOS RDS services
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      10      80      rds1.gplab.com.
qry-api-1._nmos-query._tcp.gplab.com.        3600    IN SRV  10      10      80      rds1.gplab.com.
```

We add TXT records which provide information relevant to the IS-04 specification

```
; Additional metadata relevant to the IS-04 specification.
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.	TXT	"api_ver=v1.0,v1.1,v1.2,v1.3" "api_proto=http" "pri=0" "api_auth=false"
qry-api-1._nmos-query._tcp.gplab.com.           TXT     "api_ver=v1.0,v1.1,v1.2,v1.3" "api_proto=http" "pri=0" "api_auth=false"
```

We add records which associate the NMOS register and NMOS query with the RDS.
```
; RDS
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      20      80      rds1.gplab.com.
_nmos-query._tcp.gplab.com.        3600    IN SRV  10      20      80      rds1.gplab.com.
```

In both cases above the `SRV` records tell clients to access the server using port `80`. This would suit default HTTP access, but if HTTPS is used, this would need to be changed to `443`.

Lastly we provide the IP addresses for the hosts in the system. This file can of course be expanded to contain names for all the hosts, end-points, and switches in the system, making debugging simpler.


```
; Nameserver records
dns1.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.18
rds1.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.50
```



### Starting the service

Once the files are in place, the service can be started and made permanent (will run after a reload/reboot of the server):

CentOS 7
```
systemctl restart named
systemctl enable named
```

Ubuntu/Raspbian
```
systemctl restart bind9
systemctl enable bind9
```

### Enabling DNS through the linux firewall

Often, linux default will prevent DNS through the firewall, so you have issues with connectivity to the DNS server now running. The following will enable DNS through the CentOS 7 firewall, and make this permanent:


```
firewall-cmd --permanent --add-port=53/udp
firewall-cmd --reload
```

## Testing

You can test the functionality of the new DNS server right from the server itself.  You can also run these tests from a Linux box or Mac by setting the `nameserver` portion of the Linux or Mac box network configuration to point to your new DNS server.  If you run the tests below from a separate computer, omit `localhost` or `@locahost` from the commands below.

There are a couple of tools that allow the DNS operation to be tested.

We can verify that the host names of the RDS servers are configured:


```
gp@gplab.com:~ # nslookup rds1.gplab.com locahost
Server:		192.168.0.18
Address:	192.168.0.18#53

Name:	rds1.gplab.com
Address: 192.168.0.50
```


We can see that the lookup was resolved by `192.168.0.18`, and resulted in the address for the `rds1` server being returned as `192.168.0.50`.

The `dig` tool provides a little more info:

```
gp@gplab.com:~ # dig @localhost rds1.gplab.com

; <<>> DiG 9.10.6 <<>> rds1.gplab.com
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 12178
;; flags: qr aa rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 2, ADDITIONAL: 3

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;rds1.gplab.com.		IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
rds1.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.50

;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
gplab.com.		3600	IN	NS	dns2.gplab.com.
gplab.com.		3600	IN	NS	dns1.gplab.com.

;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
dns1.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.18
dns2.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.20

;; Query time: 43 msec
;; SERVER: 192.168.0.18#53(192.168.0.18)
;; WHEN: Tue Jul 13 19:58:50 IST 2021
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 134
```

### Checking the SRV records

We can also use `dig` to check the presence of the `_nmos._register_.tcp` record:


```
gp@gplab.com:~ # dig @localhost _nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com SRV

; <<>> DiG 9.10.6 <<>> _nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com SRV
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 44496
;; flags: qr aa rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 2, AUTHORITY: 2, ADDITIONAL: 5

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 4096
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com. IN	SRV

;; ANSWER SECTION:
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com. 3600 IN SRV	10 10 80 rds1.gplab.com.
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com. 3600 IN SRV	20 10 80 rds2.gplab.com.

;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
gplab.com.		3600	IN	NS	dns2.gplab.com.
gplab.com.		3600	IN	NS	dns1.gplab.com.

;; ADDITIONAL SECTION:
rds1.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.50
rds2.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.51
dns1.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.18
dns2.gplab.com.	3600	IN	A	192.168.0.20

;; Query time: 41 msec
;; SERVER: 192.168.0.18#53(192.168.0.18)
;; WHEN: Tue Jul 13 20:00:53 IST 2021
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 243
```

## Backing Up DNS (BIND) Servers

To provide resilience, a secondary DNS server and a secondary RDS server should be provisioned. end-points should have both DNS IP addresses configured, allowing them to use the backup DNS server, if the primary is no longer available.

BIND allows primary / secondary pairing, so that the zones and hosts configuration can be automatically updated on the secondary device, reducing the amount of duplication.

There should be one `PTR` record for each instance of the service you wish to advertise. Here we have one Registration API and one Query API:

```
_nmos-register._tcp	PTR	reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp
_nmos-query._tcp		PTR	qry-api-1._nmos-query._tcp
```

If more than one RDS server can be used, then two records can be provided, with a priority setting to enable end-points to make a preferred decision. In this case, the first is prioritized, with the `10` beating `20`.

```
; NMOS RDS services
; Expected RDS
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      10      80      rds1.gplab.com.

; Backup RDS
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  20      10      80      rds2.gplab.com.
```

A TXT record providing information relevant to the IS-04 specification

```
; Additional metadata relevant to the IS-04 specification.
reg-api-1._nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.	TXT	"api_ver=v1.0,v1.1,v1.2,v1.3" "api_proto=http" "pri=0" "api_auth=false"
```


Take advice from the RDS vendor about how to set the Priority (`10`) and Weight (`20`) for these `SRV` records. If active-active is available in the RDS servers, then these records can be used to provide load-balancing. In the case below, both records would be served with equal weight.


```
; RDS A
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      20      80      rds1.gplab.com.

; RDS B
_nmos-register._tcp.gplab.com.     3600    IN SRV  10      20      80      rds2.gplab.com.
```


In all cases above the `SRV` records are identifying a port number of `80`. This would suit default HTTP access, with `443` needed for HTTPS - but again, this would be a question for the RDS vendor.

Lastly we provide the IP addresses for the hosts in the system. This file can of course be expanded to contain names for all the hosts, end-points, and switches in the system, making debugging simpler 


```
; Nameserver records
dns1.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.18
dns2.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.20
rds1.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.50
rds2.gplab.com.            IN      A       192.168.0.51
```
